tell me about wavelengths and
frequencies what's going on there so
light is kind of like the byproduct of
this hurly Burly frisky puppy kind of
energy of matter all right you might
look at the chair you're sitting on and
think it's solid and motionless but if
you're peering down to the atomic level
you're actually able to see all of the
movement of those atoms when I'm looking
at Chuck he's maybe 2T away I don't see
him as he is I see him as he once was
two billionths of a second ago and
believe me I'm a chang man
now what is data sonification all of
these different elements have been
mapped with color so instead of just
looking at as a visual we're going to
hear those mapped to
[Music]
sound and now please welcome to the
stage your personal astrophysicist and
host of Star Talk Neil degrass Tyson
[Applause]
welcome thanks for this warm welcome
tonight's topic I don't know if you know
this in advance is titled windows to the
universe everything you ever thought you
didn't know about Windows to the
universe you're going to hear tonight
just to be clear and we're going to talk
about the James web Space Telescope
x-ray telescopes and we're even going to
see how we can extract
sounds from data in space and we're
going to see how all of that happens
because we have one of the world's
experts on that with me this evening
before we bring her out let me introduce
my co-host that will be Chuck
Nice good man every bud how are you all
right there you go thank you thank you
we're going to introduce now our
official expert guest for the evening uh
she's an author and an expert in AST
visualization bet you didn't know that
was a word did you and but not only that
Beyond astrov visualization is a
dimension of that called Data
sonification welcome to the stage Dr
Kimberly Aran Kimberly welcome thank you
hello hi all right so you're a
visualization scientist that's a thing
it's a thing and who it's not an
accident that our field astrophysics
makes its way to the pages of books and
headlines and and the front page
articles because we not only have I
think cool content we have cool images
and you've taken it even to new heights
so you are what do we call an emerging
technology lead yes that's a thing it's
a thing but for the Chandra telescope up
at the center for astrophysics in
Cambridge so uh the ch telescope
specializes in in what x-rays so instead
of taking infrared images like the James
web does chander looks at x-ray light so
the super high energy light that's out
there in the universe okay so we'll get
back to that just lay the stage for that
and you are the principal investigator
of NASA's Universe of sound data
sonification project yes okay so you
just all up in this yeah okay all right
and your author yes this this is just a
stunning book light the visible spectrum
and Beyond uh this is just an
expensively produced just look at this
it's an expensively produced book so
congratulations on that and that effort
and you have a co-author on this Megan
Watsky Megan Watsky and who's Megan waty
she is my science bestie she writes all
the press material for the chander
observatory and she's just awesome okay
so uh we all might wonder as did I till
I met Kim what is data
ification so so why don't we just sort
of give a taste of it and then we'll dig
in deeper in a few moments just check
this out
[Music]
so that was real data real data real
data so it's basically the CALM Act for
the universe yes you know funny we've
actually had people approach us asking
for like meditative versions of this
that they can use for those apps yeah I
m s those the aliens who wanted humans
okay humans that hum aliens with an
xiety problems maybe yeah all right so
before we get up in that let's just lay
some groundwork so we're all on the same
page speaking the same language all
right so just a brief intro to
telescopes and
electromagnetic energy you live in that
space and so we can look at beautiful
images of the universe and what are some
fundamental things just up front you
should be able to tell us about it
because we know for example these these
objects are far away I can when I'm
looking at Chuck he's maybe 2 feet away
I don't see him as he is I see him as he
once was two billionths of a second ago
and believe me I'm a changed man
now just letting you know two billions
of a second ago two billion of a second
ago I'm telling you I was awful so
that's like not much time but as you go
out into the universe of course the time
delay is much much greater we have to
factor that in to what we're saying
about what we think is happening now
versus whatever it once happen but also
we are seeing the
universe through telescopes as our
eyeballs would receive it receive this
information and our eyeballs are
sensitive to what we call visible light
and yeah visible light is we love our
visible light but how does visible light
compare to the rest of the
electromagnetic spectrum it is a very
very tiny portion it's like if you're
into the piano if you play Middle Sea
and a couple keys on either side that's
your visible light and then all the rest
of those 88 keys that's everything else
that we're missing out on in the world
in the so our eyes suck they do they do
yeah we have awful eyes not the best not
the best but we didn't know that until
we discovered other bands of light
outside of that Spectrum yep and there's
a there's a fun story about the the
discovery of infrared all right which is
just outside of the red it was William
herel mhm he after Newton had laid down
the Spectrum red orange yellow green
blue violet he asked the question and
this is this is what separates great
minds from like everybody else he
wondered if each color had a different
temperature so he took a thermometer and
put it in he had a prism and the light
coming through and there's like the
Rainbow on the table and he put the
thermometer in in each color but you
need a control thermometer right cuz you
don't you you don't know if what's
happening to that thermometer is also
happening just in the ambient air so he
put a thermometer to the side of the
spectrum where there was no light just
off to the red there's nothing there
puts a thermometer there and then he
goes to to check and to compare and he
discovers that the hottest thermometer
was the one where there was no light
coming in and 100 thermometers later
and so is it is it a mistake is it a and
he concluded that the sun because that
was sunlight coming through the prism
must be emitting light quote unfit for
vision that was his the first
description of the discovery of
infrared infrared light more on infrared
later but we can't see infrared light we
can't more on this so our atmosphere is
trans par to visible light mm and what's
the best evidence of that what do you
think I think uh the fact that uh it uh
we see the sun yes yes good I was going
out on the limb guys good one Chuck yeah
in broad daylight you can see the sun
yeah exactly we see visible light right
and it comes comes through the
atmosphere but that atmosphere is not
good for other bands so what what are
challenges we have and how do we
overcome it right so like Earth has this
super protective layer thankfully for us
right right but that means x-ray light
can't get down here that means uh
ultraviolet radiation only some can get
down here right so there's all of these
things that we have to do we have to
launch telescopes up space above Earth's
atmosphere above the atmosphere
absorbing layers yep okay and of all of
the bands that don't make it through
visible light makes it through we are
sensitive to visible light so it's a
nice matchup it we evolved under this
star the sun under this atmosphere of
Earth exactly it would be cruel if we
were sensitive to like microwaves or
something and nothing came in in mic we'
just be blind is that the reason why our
eyes suck it's more reasons why our eyes
suck so so the Hubble telescope is one
of the great observatories y that was
launched above and that saw what kind of
light mostly Optical but also a little
infrared and a little bit ultraviolet
okay and the Hubble we all remember the
Hubble telescope it's still up launched
in the early '90s yep and it was Stupify
I remember just losing my breath every
time I saw one of the images that was
published and we have one of the early
ones here what can you tell us about
this the Hubble Deep fields and what
this is so beautiful it's because they
didn't really think anything was there
right they pointed the telescope at it
for a period of time wanting to see what
would happen a blank part of the sky a
blank part of the sky not knowing that
this was what they'd get and it's just
teaming with all of this stuff right all
of these galaxies that are far far away
and it's just a whole other glimpse into
our universe that we had never had
before Hubble it really set the stage in
fact that observing effort would have
never made it through the telescope
allocation committee oh right which is
lot of those things right you need to
have time for play right right right the
ciity of just let's just look up exctly
and see what's there see what happens
yeah if you if you apply I want to find
an empty spot at the sky and just stare
at it what I can do that I don't no I
don't really need a grant or government
permission right right and so so this
was done by the director of The
Observatory who and we with our
foresight each director has I forgot it
was it 10% 15 there's some percent of
the total allocated time called
director's discretionary time the
director can just do whatever he wants
do whatever the director wants 15% it's
just something 10 but yeah something it
depends a lot though when you think
about limited the time of a telescope
but it paved the way cuz now other
telescopes do that same thing knowing
that they'll be rewarded it set the
stage other and and it's not just what
the director wants the director might
see a proposal that is a little risky
but everyone thinks it's too risky this
say let's do it yep so they can pick
other people's research resarch yeah
yeah yeah and that's what made that that
image who was do we know that who who is
this cuzz let me tell you something that
guy has
coones because you're like I mean just
think of it he's like this okay I want
to take the telescope and I would like
to look at nothing yes exactly the most
powerful
TC subscribed by a lot like everybody
wants to use Hubble right and so to take
the time to look at nothing nothing and
to turn it into something yeah but that
like poetry there RIS the gamble that
this cuz he would be known right now if
we were looking at a blank screen as the
dumbest man at NASA ever right right
right but this came up and just as a
reminder nearly everything on this image
is an entire galaxy outside of the Milky
Way there's a couple of stars those have
the little spiky the spiky features uh
but in the Hubble Deep Deep Field forgot
how long the exposure was but it's
seeing galaxies way out to the edge of
the universe we were happy with that
until what well I would say until
chander came along and did it two and
then the James web Space Telescope came
Jam space
okay so let's compare what Hubble sees
with James Webb and one of the most
iconic images was the Eagle Nebula right
talk us through these two images yeah so
I love hearing all the oo and a from the
audience you're the best audience ever
okay so we're looking at this beautiful
area of starbirth right these tall
column Columns of gas and dust it
they're just teeming with new baby stars
that are being formed and then you can
see on the Hubble image which is a
relatively deep image on the left left
right you can see that there's really a
Darth of stars you can see where those
clumps of gas and dust where those
Stellar nurseries are are kind of they
look almost like attached and really
kind of connected and then you look on
that same field of view from the James
web Space Telescope and what are you
seeing like it's sparkling with stars
right you can capture all of that
sparkling amazingness and then you're
also starting to see that there are like
little newborn Stars those are some of
those really bright red patches that you
can see as well and again now you're
seeing more about the inherent structure
of those tall pillars in gas and dust
where the stars are forming and the
population of stars around them because
Stars may be born in a nursery together
but then they kind of grow up and go out
on their way and you're kind of seeing
some of that happen which is I think
pretty awesome and so why is infrared
good for that because infrared is like
being able to see through things right
it's kind of like well I can't use the
X-ray analogy CU I'm going to use that
later but it's about being able to peer
through a very different way and capture
an entirely different kind of phenomena
type which is lovely so Hubble could not
see into this gas cloud right so it
looked like there's not much there right
it's just a dark area of the sky you
pull out jwst Y and that cloak is
transparent to it as though it's looking
through a window just a glass screen
it's like You' cleaned the window right
yeah okay you know so uh infrared has
that ability to look through so tell me
about wave lengths and frequencies
what's going on there so light is kind
of like the byproduct of this hurly
Burly you know frisky puppy kind of
energy of matter all right you might
look at the chair you're sitting on and
think it's solid and motionless but if
you're peering down to the atomic level
you're actually able to see all of the
movement of those atoms right and so
light is that by product of all of that
activity so like a photon a packet of
energy is kind of like leaving the scene
of the crime because there's a collision
between those charged particles for
example um and then when you're trying
to characterize light you've got
frequency and and wavelength essentially
if you picture um a small pond and you
have a steady drop of stones into that
pond and that will cause that beautiful
Rippling out so the steady drop of
stones will keep it constant for us for
this little exercise so you've got these
beautiful ripples going out at these
beautiful speeds if you're going to time
essentially the time it takes for one of
those ripples to make it out to a point
that is going to give you your frequency
then if you're going to measure how many
ripples per second exct go by and then
if you're going to measure the distance
between two of the Ripple Peaks that is
giving you the wavelength so it's giving
you two really important characteristics
to understand is this low energy is this
high energy are we looking at x-ray
light are we looking at infrared so all
it distinguishes x-rays from infrared is
just the wavelength of the light right
they're all just forms of energy all
right and so give me the full list of of
all the electromagnetic spectrum
starting with the coolest we've got the
radio and it is typically associated
with temperature as well so you've got
the coolest material that is sort of the
longest and then you've got the hottest
material which is typically going to be
sort of like really high and so you've
got the radio you've got the microwave
you've got the infrared then you've got
our tiny little puny visible ity bitsy
right red orange yellow green blue
violet mhm and then you're going to go
on to the ultraviolet and then to the
X-ray and then the garies so it's this
beautiful expanse and having all these
different kinds of like it's like having
different Tools in your tool belt to
pull out at any time so you want to use
the appropriate tool you don't want to
use a hammer to screw something in right
you want to use the appropriate tool so
if you're going to try to look for an
exploded star in the aftermath you want
to use x-ray light if you want to look
through because you know in advance
that's a high xrayer phenomenal high
energy phenomen just going to you high
energy light exactly or if you want to
look through to like Ancient Ancient
galaxies you want the infrared light
with a James web Space Telescope wa wait
but that's that's a special case it is a
special case Okay because those galaxies
were not given all the brand new
galaxies did not give us infrared but
you're watching them in infrared right
so what happened in between well the
universe is expanding and things are
stretching out so it kind of changes
everything unfortunately yeah so one of
the most brilliant features of James web
is we want to look at early Universe
galaxies being born and the birth of of
galaxies is rich in all your favorite
high energy except since then the
universe has expanded the light in the
universe got stretched and it's no
longer ultraviolent or x-rays it's been
red shifted in so far past the visible
light into the infrared so you you tune
James web for the infrared you get to
watch galaxies when they were emitting
ultraviolet even though they're not
in the infrared the universe itself as a
medium that they're riding on stretched
it out like if that was the car you
turned it into a stretch limo and now
it's infrared and now you can see it and
you can go a step further and you can
actually use these different kinds of
light together so for example a recent
headline was that the James web Space
Telescope and the chander observatory
worked together to find the most
farthest black hole using x-ray light
and infrared light so they found the
Galaxy with that infrared light and then
they looked for like the imprint of the
X-ray from Chandra and so together using
an older tool and a newer tool and time
they able to find the earliest black
hole like 13 fortunate coincidence that
the infrared part of the spectrum tuned
to see the birth of galaxies is just the
kind of light to see into nearby gas
clouds yep to look for stars being born
exactly you can combine the infrared
with the X xray and Gamma will you find
Marvel Superhero I think so you'll
definitely find the Hulk of nothing
else I don't know if anyone operates an
x-ray besides Superman well there's a
that's DC right non marble so Superman's
DC correct forgive you I saw we I didn't
want to be that God know I know
yeah you're on noticed now you don't get
that Marvel or DC Universe right so I'm
reminded of one of the characters in
Star Trek the Next Generation Jordie
Jordie Jordi Le fors there's the
character's name played by Lavar B kin
yes Lavar Bergen oh I'm sure he'd be
very happy to hear
that from Roots back in the 1970s he was
Kint dude if you look on his Facebook
page a picture him as
Kint so he he remembers the RO okay I'm
sorry I'm just sure like Lavar Burton
done everything in Show Business and
somebody walks I'm
like all right his character had lost
his vision yeah and they outfitted him
with a
visor which is in fact an acronym v i s
o r visual instrument and sensory organ
replacement so this enabled he
previously blind to see every band of
the electromagnetic spectrum must been
chaos what's up
to this say it this good and I'm
thinking do you really want to see it
all you all would be glowing in infrared
cuz you have body heat you I'd be seeing
your cell phones uh lit up from
microwaves i' see radio waves coming
through it would be a m I got to tell
you it sounds pretty dog on cool to me
maybe it's too much too much information
but again I'm the only one up here who
smokes
marijuana so so he was clever so the
writers were clever to have that as a
part as a character in the in the in the
in the show and I think he had the
ability to sort of tune oh did like know
he could select what he think it wasn't
a copy he could actually like a picture
so in episode 213 he act don't be lying
no you know you but it was very
believable wasn't it it was just for a
minute I said no you do not know what
episode 2113
was there weren't that many episodes of
that show you're absolutely correct so
if jwst can see the birth of galaxies
and see the birth of stars which means
the birth of planets made of ingredients
of life it gives us
access to
Stardust out of which we are all made oh
so tell us about the Chandra telescope
and what it was designed to do and why
sure sure what was it named after first
of all so it was actually named after a
brilliant Nobel winning prize astronomer
um or astrophysicist um an
indian-american named suban Yan Chandra
sear and what I love about that actually
the naming was little contest that NASA
had held and they did that for almost
for many of the yes they do for a lot
students wrote in we had teachers write
in and the winning entry was for subaman
Yan and the two winners a student and a
teacher separate by the way not together
um both want on to become astronomers
which I actually really love the sort of
symmetry of that but so anyway so
chander gets to look at the high energy
Universe it gets to look at things like
exploding Stars it gets to look at
things like galaxies it gets to look at
things like clusters of galaxies so just
to just to reaffirm those things involve
high energy phenomena yes and x-rays are
high energy light right and like you
said about the chair occasionally matter
barfs up a photon if the matter is high
energy it's going to barf up a high
energy Photon yes exactly is the
universe really just that simple barfing
up photons I think so I mean I feel like
that could be a book okay
um or something I guess so know you
should write
it people will buy that especially young
people I'm telling you right now barfing
up photons I I'm I want to go get it
right now yeah that's pretty good that's
pretty good okay so in ad. 1054 yeah uh
on July 4th uh the universe celebrated
American independence with a star that
exploded it was recorded by the Chinese
yes and uh today we observe that object
on the sky as the Crab Nebula yeah named
just cuz it looked very crabby yep we
have only seen it with regular telescope
and then you come along and put a an
x-ray telescope on it and what did you
find um so the Crab Nebula is this
beautiful example of what happened when
a really massive star who starts running
out of fuel it collapses essentially on
itself and then it just explodes it's
guts out into the universe now what
happens with the crab is that a neutron
star formed and a neutron star is like
this super dense like like a teaspoon of
the material probably weighs more than
all of the people on the planet right
it's super dense and it's creating these
beautiful rings and jet-like structures
because there's this antimatter and
matter kind of collision stuff going on
and then you're seeing essentially the
results of that chander is actually able
you just said that casually matter
antimatter yeah she actually sounded
like she was on Star Trek for a second
like it me no yes more to the Marvel
Universe are you there something like
that just be clear just tell everybody
what antimatter is just to put it on the
same page it's just this particle that
essentially I mean you explain it I
guess okay yeah I could I mean it's
matter has an antimatter counterpart we
it was predicted and then discovered in
the last hundred years by the way people
alive today were alive before we knew
about antimatter so it's a it's a real
thing before it became a science fiction
favorite source of fuel um and every
particle has an antimatter counterpart
and the universe creates antimatter
routinely happens in the center of the
sun happens in our particle accelerators
uh in the film Angels and Demons oh I
lik that one yeah the Dan Brown second
novel of that series it reports that the
Catholic Church oh that's right had
isolated a vial of antimatter oh that
Pope and it it's walking around the
Vatican with this vile of if anybody can
do
it it's the
pope and it's looking at like it's some
cherish thing that nobody else in the
world has and it's like dude we do this
in the lab all time no this is not a
special I totally forgot about that I
saw that scene was like nah no I so why
is it an why they call it antimatter is
like bring it together right they both
annihilate and then there's no matter
left at all and you just have
pure energy energy energy wow yeah and
so that's high energy when anima
animatic you getting high you getting
x-rays G you're getting all high energy
there so you just that's in your list of
things going on in the crab the crab is
that the Crab Nebula that's the Crab
Nebula and you can actually EXC me I
with all due respect it doesn't look
like a crap where is the CRA I know I
know I know so I think it was because in
op IAL images if you look at this object
invisible light maybe has a crab light
structure I'll be honest I still don't
see it but that's that's that's where it
came from cuz I'm going to say if that's
a that that's kind of like the
constellations like you know you look at
the constellations and let's be honest
like you're like were these people hide
because I don't see a bear yeah I don't
see a bear I don't see a crap I don't
see a guy with bow and arrow three of
the 88
constellations just barely resemble what
they're supposed to the rest requires
High imagination what are the three oh
Orion is good yes Orion is good uh
that's hard imagining a belt okay yeah
okay uh Leo the Lion is a good lion yeah
yeah I give him a lion okay the B no the
big di is not a constellation that's an
asterism it's an
asterism but I liked
the I like the audience participation
there in fact in
fact in fact by the way
don't act like y'all didn't think the
big dier was what she
thought everybody's up here just like oh
yeah look at that NE got her good D you
know dog well you thought it was a
constellation too okay the point is an
asterism like Kim said is a more
interesting subset of all the stars that
make up the constellation uh it looks
like a Dipper yes but that's not the
name of the constellation it's the big
bear and the handle of the Dipper is a
big bushy tail of the bear but Bears
don't have tails okay so
so okay M maybe the bear was the bear
was cooking
and had a ladle you know
just maybe a bear cooking with the pot
right I see I see you see what I'm
saying you could have drawn the bear
differently so that it would be using a
utensil in a kitchen yes but that's not
how the Ancients thought of it all right
back to x-rays yes yes more importantly
going down the list of what will trigger
a detection in Chandra so high energy uh
collisions you have a pulsar uh neutron
star yep that has is very dense keep
going on that list uh all right so then
we get to things like clusters of
galaxies for example yep there's one
right there one of the Ables beautiful
what chander is really good at detecting
in this case is it a cluster of galaxy
is essentially tens if not hundreds and
sometimes even thousands of galaxies
bound together but what makes it cool
for chander or I should say hot what
makes it hot for chandera is that there
is all of this like a a bath of hot gas
that envelops the cluster so you can see
that hot gas is colored blue in this
image behind us so that gas is not part
of any one Galaxy right so it's seeing
the
immersed bath is the word that's all I
can think of is a gas bath for all the G
it's a gas bath it's Galaxy gas bath
that's pretty cool right tender gets
looking more than just that like it is
amazing because you know even though
chander was built in the '90s
essentially and launched just around the
time that we were starting to understand
what exoplanets were chander gets to
look at exoplanets chander gets to work
with uh the James web Space Telescope
about looking at things like Star
formation because Stars when they're
first born they're cranky they're like
cranky toddlers right so they can emit
like these flares these x-ray flares and
what's useful about that is if it's a
very cranky star and there is an
exoplanet being born nearby how cranky
that star is will have an impact on the
possible habitability of that planet so
it's very useful to understand like what
the Stars tantrum ears were like okay so
you just said something that has a
built-in fact that I want to make sure
everybody's clear on why would the high
energy x-rays have anything to do with
the possibility of Life on an exop
Planet because of the flares from that
star those are the high energy x-rays
right an x-ray light going towards a
young planet that perhaps does not have
a super uh protective cover like Earth
does with its atmosphere can do
incredible damage and even if it does
have an atmosphere if it's powerful
enough those x-ray flares can still do a
lot of impact in a negative way to any
life that could potentially form as we
understand it so uh the molecules that
are the foundations of Life do not do
well in the presence of x-rays all that
radiation not so great okay so I first
realized that this getting X-rays at the
dentist yes and I I always wondered why
do they go outside the room close the
door and then they flick the switch why
is the switch out there like why isn't
it right next to me cuz they're doing it
10 times a
day still I just said there's something
going on in here that they not go so
Neil told him could you just sketch my
teeth yeah don't look inside don't need
to so I want to hear more about what
Chandra can detect especially in the
realm of black holes but I want to First
hear you explore what are the challenges
of making an x-ray telescope because we
a regular Optical visible light telesc
there's a lens or there's a mirror and
it focuses light we we have magnifying
glasses we have microscopes there's
there's some familiarity that we have
with those items in our culture but
x-rays is a whole another another yes so
what's going on there all right so
x-rays are really interesting because
they're so energetic you can't have just
a normal flat mirror like you could for
Hubble for example um because x-rays
will essentially just absorb it's kind
of like if you uh fire a bullet at a
wall it'll just boom into the wall right
but like if you have a gun expertise if
you file it fire it at a angle right you
can have what's called a grazing angle
and it can Ricochet off so the same
thing with x-rays you have to
essentially create these really nest Ted
Barrel shaped mirrors that can just kind
of graze the x-rays down a very long
distance to the very sensitive detectors
at the end because otherwise you just
can't capture them but in order to do
that your your mirrors they have to be
not only this interesting Barrel shape
to kind of skim multiple mirrors in a
row MTI as you graze each one and they
have to be incredibly smooth like down
to at the atomic level like if you took
Colorado and and sanded it down Pike's
Peak would be like less than an inch
tall like it's a a truly like Smooth
process and to be honest I think they
might still be the most smooth mirrors
ever produced to this day well I've
still got to get through your Colorado
color you're saying if Colorado took the
whole state just smooth the break which
has Rockies going right through it if
you made Colorado as smooth as the
mirrors onra on chra Pikes Peak less
than an inch Pikes Peak one in above the
surface of the state of Colorado and
they also have to be super clean by the
way so if you take like the size of
there goes New
York yeah I could see that so if you
take something like the size of computer
monitor you could only have one teeny
tiny Speck of dust on that entire size
so they had to be very clean and then
they had to be coated with aridium to
make sure like that x-ray light could be
focused down just it very dense metal
very dense yep because you don't want
the x-rays busted into it exactly like
bullet into a wall you don't want that
so you have to create this very smooth
process for the x-rays to go down 30 ft
to the sensitive detectors wait a minute
30t so this is in a spaceborn telescope
how'd you get it up there well it's
about the size of a school bus so we
packed it in really tight into the space
shuttle and H for the best and sent what
you pack it in tight this like luggage
no it was
literally squeeze your underwear in you
missed the best part of that statement
was and we hoped for the best well I
mean I hop for the best I was young the
shuttle was not a suitcase no but it was
kind of being treated as one like it
barely fit in there and I I don't know
it was designed to use all the available
volume yes like 100% and it actually
made the flight for the astronauts that
were bringing it up risky because if you
have a very heavy payload your abort
scenarios actually become less positive
I don't know how to see that but you
know less like I don't want to say less
likely but yeah you know we know they're
screwed yeah yeah so if chander if they
had a problem with launch and chander
was still on board and they had to come
back it would have been very very
challenging very challenging but you
just drop it in the Atlantic I mean um
no cuz they wouldn't have had time to
just empty it out um it's also it goes
out with a the arm like so it's not
Loosey Goosey in there you know what I
mean it's not like a pair of glasses
rattling around in your suitcase so yeah
yeah they're screwed yeah yeah okay but
it worked but it worked amazingly
beautiful it worked perfect a shout out
to the engineers that work closely with
the scientists to make all this work yep
it's not the scientist inventing that no
no no but like everyone the astronauts
the mission controllers everyone like
they were just on point yeah oh give me
a couple more examples sorry I believe
this requires a
USA yeah that is a good one
USA well you know I like that the
Olympics are over okay I know but it's
okay not the Olympics of space baby we
are still gold medal I mean if we could
take a moment of national pride x-ray
astronomy was created in the US and like
we have this incredible expertise that
to this day like chander is still the
most highresolution x-ray detector that
we have and it's impressive and that's
from the 1990s so we're talking 30 years
yes it it's been 25 years that it was
launched just last month wow yeah
yeah excellent I know God I love this
country so you are working at the center
for astrophysics up in Cambridge which
is the The Joint title of the Harvard
College Observatory and the
Smithsonian government Smithsonian
astrophysical Observatory I remember
being there I'm that old in the 70s
where x-ray astronomy was being born yes
yes and the earliest x-ray Detective
they didn't have good resolution we just
wanted to detect whatever was up there
yeah and I remembered the challenge that
it put upon the design Engineers because
the payload couldn't be very big or
heavy and so the earliest x-ray
telescopes were these miniaturized x-ray
detectors right around that time the US
Congress says we want to scan everybody
walking into the airport to not have
weapons well how you going to do that
x-ray detectors did they have a a
portable x-ray no they came to the
astronomers MH you've got one yes we did
so we we my my people in the day
pioneered the x-ray technology that
first landed in every airport in the
United States yeah in the 1970s right a
whole company was created for that
American science and engineering which
had a Ricardo gone yep who won the Nobel
Prize he won the Nobel Prize for effort
in x-ray so so the correspondence
between moving Frontier of engineering
and astrophysics and applications on
Earth has it fascinating backstory there
but it keeps going to Modern time give
me some more examples yeah so uh like I
mentioned Chandra was really challenging
technologically to build and so
technology had to be invented just to
create Chandra and so what that means is
like when today uh cuz we have so many
clever people that know how to recycle
these Technologies and create these
spin-offs right so today when I'm
getting a mamogram like that technology
has been made more high resolution and
lower dose because of Chandra ANS are
X-rays x-rays y when I'm gooing an MRI
for example a low dose of those magnets
that they use that's because of Chandra
environmental monitoring of like shark
populations has been improved because of
x shks yes environmental does that have
to do with x-rays because the way you
monitor them from I I'm not an
oceanologist or sharkologist I don't
know what that word is but you know
neither of those words exist that's what
we know you're neither of those we can
make it up we're all friends here
oceanologist and listen I I believe I
actually uh tried to pick up someone at
a bar once and told them that I was an
oceanologist I am clearly not working in
Marine
Affairs Chandra technology is being used
to study those populations of things
like shark and
so so there could be sort of algorithmic
tools and tactics that are needed for
the astronomy that then have
applications right that's definitely
part of it I mean it's like when you do
really hard things up there like to get
up there like you get to improve things
down here and that's really cool yeah so
I know that it gave us airport x-rays
but is it possible that Chandra could
fix the TSA no no that's asking too much
for chander chandra's got a lot of black
holes to look at so I we you do we left
off with with pulsars neutron stars as
high energy places uh give me let's keep
going okay black holes talk about that
so Chandra actually became a black hole
Hunter what's really interesting is the
the actual scientific point of Chandra
at first was because when x-ray
astronomers looked up into the sky it
was just like a sea of x-rays everywhere
and so chander was created to resolve
that what was called the X-ray
background and it was one of the first
things chander did and it found that it
wasn't just a c at all because chander
brought into sharp focus and found that
it was mostly black holes so the early
detectors just couldn't just some x-rays
coming from out there somewhere it's
like taking your glasses off it you know
you just see a haze well I have very bad
Vision so when I take my contacts out
that's what chander was so if you take
your glasses off and it's a blur you
would just think there's just a blur of
light right now you boost the resolution
and you say well there's a source of
light there exactly right so Chandra
Chandra found that there were billions
and billions of black holes black hole
black Hol each one of these mostly were
black holes there was other stuff too of
course wait if a black hole if no light
escapes a black hole Yeah uh what are
you actually seeing then to know that
it's a black hole Yeah it's a great
question we just try to
SL okay so this is actually Centaurus a
this is a very active Galaxy and that
very bright white spot at the very
center that is essentially the area that
the black hole is you'd have to zoom in
super super deep to actually find the
black hole ho but that's where it is now
this is an active black hole which means
we've also got Jets of this high energy
material streaming out as well past that
like Dusty disc of the center area right
so that black hole at the center is
powering all of that like a amazing
energy that you're seeing so back to the
question of like how do we see them if
we can't see black holes well so black
holes you know are kind of sitting there
doing their thing but they have a lot
going on because they're in an ecosystem
right so if there is stuff around that
black hole that black hole might need to
have a snack if it's an asteroid nearby
and that kind of falls into its
gravitational pole there might be a
little small x-ray flare if there's like
a big massive star being chomped on by
that black hole now you're going to get
a much bigger x-ray flare and those
burps can cause all sorts of cool things
that chander can see and it's fed by a
disc a accretion disc exactly we call it
I have an accretion disc
myself middle-aged May
where matter
gathers and spirals down toilet bowl
style and but that's a place that's the
ecosystem I guess you're talking about
right and because as more matter if
there's matter available to be consumed
it's got to confront the accretion disc
before it gets into the black hole
itself exactly and you're saying that's
where all the action is that is where
the action is like that's the downtown
some of you have probably seen like the
first images of a black hole from The
Event Horizon telescope for example I
mean I never thought I would see that in
my life time I'll be honest like it that
was just amazing so it gets to see the
silhouette of that right that you were
just describing it's seeing the shadow
of that black hole what chander sees is
further out because every black hole
sits in an environment it's not in a
vacuum right so we've got all this stuff
around it and that that stuff kind of
tells the story of how the black hole is
acting how it what is doing what it is
eating if it's sleeping like our own
black hole right now is kind of sleepy
it's they call it a sleeping giant the
one in our own milky our own Milky Way
Every big Galaxy got its own hole
exactly right so ours is kind of sleepy
which is what they say I'll take their
word for it um which means like black ho
which means we're in a good place though
right so we don't have a whole lot going
on with our super bassive black hole
that's cool but in something like
Centaurus a it's awake it is
superpowered and it is blasting out an
intense amount of energy cuz there's a
lot happening in it all right so even
though everything wants to get in a
black hole
it's got to work its way there and not
everything makes its way in right
because there's so much activity there
there's some actions that actually spew
matter back out right and it's not
coming out of the black hole itself
right it's coming out of the ecosystem
around it around exact that's very cool
Isn't that cool okay so now I understand
that you can also detect Dark Matter
yeah so dark matter is fascinating right
one of the things I love about astronomy
is like it's so humbling like we know
nothing we know nothing and so if you
think of the the universe is like a
jelly bean jar 95% of those jelly beans
are going to be black because they're
representing either dark matter or dark
energy a very unpopular
jar right so dark matter is sort of like
the thing that holds things together and
dark energy is something that's like
pushing things apart that's kind of I
like to think of them there only 5% of
those jelly beans are going to be
colored like normal stuffed jelly beans
like the ones that you want to eat I
don't like the black licorice ones so
like the Cherry ones the whatever the
white is coconut I don't even know 5%
that's it most of the universe is dark
and so it was really interesting because
when chander started looking at these
clusters of galaxies right these these
Bays of hot gas if you will um one of
them in particular I'm forgetting its
scientific name Abel something um but
Nick Dame the bullet cluster clearly
showed that the normal matter was
essentially being dragged behind the
dark matter or or I should say like the
gravitational information that we were
getting of the dark matter you're
describing the bullet CL the bullet
cluster but you're not directly
detecting the dark matter you're not
because it's invisible but you can
essentially map it through the pull the
gravitational lensing will give you it's
like if you use a wine glass to like
look at light it kind of bends so with
that bending of light you can use it as
a tool to map things so like the pink
stuff is the normal matter that's the
bionic matter that's all like the stuff
that we're made of for example um the
blue stuff is just a map of the dark
matter and now dark matter doesn't
really interact with stuff in the way
that normal matter does so you can see
that the blue and this this is a
collision of two very massive massive
clusters of galaxies this was at least
at the time the most energetic uh event
that we had in the universe after the
big bang and so the um the blue matter
you can see is ahead because during that
Collision the normal matter it's like
air resistance you know and there's a
drag on something and so you can see
that it kind of stayed behind but
there's no such problem for the Dark
Matter it doesn't interact like that so
it just keeps going and so the the
lensing I there's a huge history behind
lensing where Albert Einstein predicts
that intense gravitational fields which
Dark Matter would have right would
distort images of galaxies in the
background and then you'd see this
effect almost like a fun house mirror so
that would be the evidence that there's
still a lot of gravity there even if all
your matter was left behind right
exactly so it just ripped the two apart
right so this was a technique that kind
of showed it work so this was the first
direct proof for that and they've then
applied that to like dozens and dozens
of clusters of galaxies since and saw
the same thing so just to make sure
we're on the same page we on a planet
around a star our star is joined 100
billion other stars in the Milky Way and
there's 100 billion other Milky Ways out
there but they're not all evenly
scattered if we look out there we find
that many of them are clustered so
clusters of galaxies not just clusters
of stars within a Galaxy clusters of
galaxies and you just described two
clusters of galaxies that collided yep
yep passed through each other y the Dark
Matter kept going the regular matter got
left behind exactly isn't that neat
crazy it is crazy crazy yeah crazy so
now now that we all have a cosmic
vocabulary yeah now you're gonna take us
away from that because we've been
showing us pictures until now and but
that's not even your specialty your
specialty is what else do you do with
those pictures yeah and it's data
sonification yeah what motivated you to
convert visual images into sound uh so I
I love data like I'm just a data junkie
right and so I'm always trying to figure
out if a scientist is going to be
working on a problem like what kind of
ways do they need their data in order to
figure it out what might be new ways
that'll offer us like new avenues of
opportunity and then conversely I'm also
thinking and what do people like want to
experience with this data a friend of
mine Wanda Diaz she's an astronomer and
a computer scientist she's been blind
since she was a teenager and she talks
about how when she was in school a
professor would be writing on a
Blackboard and she couldn't see it right
like a math equation or something um and
so later on she went on to develop
technology to essentially take data and
translate into sound that's the process
of data sonification and she uses that
to study stars to understand Stellar
characteristics uh and I have another
friend Gary foran who is an astronomer
who does the same thing he uses
sonification to be able to study
Galaxies for example so our goal was to
take the data that we had been creating
from Chandra and from other telescopes
as well and just mathematically map that
into something that you could hear to
see like what would happen it was
especially over the pandemic so we had a
little more time to like play do you
know what I mean like well we weren't
doing events we weren't doing a whole
lot like there was just so much that had
changed bored I wouldn't say that never
would but we had time to think a little
differently we get it and sonification
was just I don't know I I love the way
came it sounds like the data
satification not only serve those who
are vision impaired it might offer other
elements of interpretation for the data
even for those who are cited yes it's
like another tool to have in your tool
belts right um particularly if you think
of different kinds of objects like a
variable star is a star that's like
changing frequently enough that humans
can map it and we get a lot of data on
these variable stars but the human sense
of sight if you're just looking at a
chart of that data changing over time
it's a little bit challenging uh the
human sense of hearing is really good to
be able to pick out some of those
variations right and you can also train
to become a better listener of your data
there's been research to show that so
it's not only a tool for scientists it's
also a a way of understanding it if
you're blind or low vision and it's just
been a joy of a project to work on like
so when I think of data sonification
there are a lot of different um should I
call them Dimensions that you can queue
on so there's the color which would be
like the frequency the wavelength of
light there's also the intensity yep
right it's a whole other thing yes
that's not even the same as the color
it's just is it bright or is it dim yep
right and then there's Loc
on an image these are all sort of
separately trackable bits of data and
you you have access to all of these
right right and you and you decide what
would best serve the need of the mot
right because you have the scientific
story that's embedded in that data and
you're trying to essentially communicate
it so you try to figure out all right
the best way to communicate this
exploded star through sound is through a
radial mapping because you're going to
Trace essentially the shape of that
exploded storm we have Cass a yes was
that an example that's yes okay so so
tell us about Cass a yeah so Cass is an
exploded star it's the leftover de
debris field from that star that
exploded its guts out all over the
universe oh just want to say Cass is
sure for
Cass a a
constellation who's the the queen of
Ethiopia or Egypt so some African
country Copa and if you wanted to find
her it's just a Big W in the sky yes
that would I actually love that one an
asterism the W otherwise it's aone right
okay so so and we just name because we
find that object within the stars that
track that constellation exactly with a
the first it was a a okay so pick it up
so chander has looked at this object
many many times so as the Hubble Space
Telescope and recently the James we web
telescope have as well and you can see
like it looks electric right so you're
looking at the color coding of this
object is actually telling you about
chemical composition of it so we're able
to detect with chander because it not
only has two detectors it also has like
gradings that can essentially uh capture
the fingerprint of light that DNA this
is just Chandra this is just Chandra and
how long is this exposure if you will uh
about 2 million seconds okay I know
there's not as many x-ray photons in the
universe right and so you do have to
look at them you got to wait around for
them you got to be patient so I could
and do you guys ever I could just apply
for I need 2 million seconds worth
abbing time I was going to say have you
ever uh speak in terms of hours and
minutes so you this is actually
interesting Target for Chandra because
it's in such a great spot of the sky
chander can look at it over and over so
it's called a calibration Target because
we can use it to make sure everything on
board the telescope is working
beautifully so it's not only the time
that scientists have propose for but we
also have more time because we check it
for like engineering issues as well oh
so I I just got to clarify there Copa is
a what's called a circumpolar
constellation so it's closer to the
North Star when you're orbiting the
Earth half the sky you can't see cuz
Earth is in the way but some of those
stars that are near the poles you get to
see for much longer periods of time yeah
and when you said was it's almost in
continuous view that would be why it's
in a great view for Chandra I mean
Chandra does go about a third of the way
to the moon but there is still lots of
stuff in the way right and you still
have to worry about all sorts of things
so it's in a great spot for chander to
be able to view over and over over again
okay we get this deep view okay so now
what are we about to experience here all
right so we're going to listen so I
mentioned the chemical elements right so
there's iron in here that's like the
purple there's silicon there's sulfur
there's calcium all of these different
elements have been mapped with color so
instead of just looking at as a visual
we're going to hear those MA to sound
and so the lowest is iron you'll hear it
as we sketch readily from the center
where that neutron star is leftover core
of that star that exploded and as we go
out kind of tracing the expansion of
that debris field we'll hear it as we
start to go through the iron the Silicon
the calcium the sulfur all the way out
to the very bright blue Rim which is
essentially a very bright like shock um
from it as it sweeps up into that
material around what the blue Rim made
of uh it's very electric it's electrons
it's all of that okay so it's not one of
those elements specifically no it is
just the highest energy shock from that
material okay so this was a supernova
yep do we know when the Supernova went
off so I think it was about 400 years
ago but it's like 11,000 light years
away so you know how old it is is
relevant to Earth time or space time
yeah so it actually happened 11,000
years ago while we're just coming out of
cave okay we just just inventing
agriculture but we saw it we saw it uh
well there might be tracings of seeing
it it's kind of one of those unclear
ones but yeah about 400 years okay so
let's check out yeah Okay let's listen
[Music]
okay this sounded like the philarmonic
just warming up tuning up right what T
just tuning just before they begin and
that was an exploding star yeah the
debris field left over when it barfed
its guts out all over the place I would
have thought more
like well we're only hearing the
leftover part so the leftover and you
know was really important to communicate
so the iron for example that was like
the the lowest note that you're hearing
what's cool about this explosion is that
right before it exploded the iron would
have been at its core right as the
heaviest element that it could produce
before the explosion after the explosion
it's more along the perimeter that tells
you that this star actually turned
itself inside out when it exploded which
is very cool and so as you're listening
to it if you have you know the technique
to listen well you can hear it as that
lower sound really picks up towards the
perimeter and I'm just realizing now
that you need to be trained to know how
to listen to this sonification that's
not any different from being trained to
learn how to look at an image right 100%
you need an astronomer there to tell you
well this is that and this is that and
this is what happened there y we provide
captions to kind of help that but yeah
and we also separate out each piece so
you can hear individually so that you
can actually learn to listen yourself
but yeah got it so you got another one
how about uh the Karina nebula yes this
is one of my favorite jwst stunning you
can't argue with this one okay what's
going to happen here so in this one
we're listening to this beautiful area
of star formation it's called The Cosmic
Cliffs because you can see all of that
really cool gas and dust down there
towards the bottom that the James web
picked up and then you're seeing all of
these young stars that have been
recently birthed and are starting to
like mature and stuff this one was
broken down a little differently because
the actual star formation area towards
the bottom is so distinct from the
visual of just the kind of empty space
if you will just Stars up on the top and
so it's divided into two pieces and
you'll hear the difference between the
top and the bottom all the stars are
sort of like a Cy CL piano uh let's play
it and see if that description makes any
sense
[Music]
that was beautiful yeah and you know I
should say I don't think I've mentioned
it we actually work with people who are
Blinder low vision to create these um
because that really is that first
desired targeted audience um and then
other people obviously enjoy them as
well but like we wanted to make sure as
somebody who has to listen to the world
around them that it made sense to people
who are Blinder lision otherwise what
are you doing right go home right
exactly go home do you guys ever think
about uh starting a radio station that
would be really cool just space so the
gas clouds were get telling us something
different from the Star points right
exactly you're getting like that whoos
of all the texture of the dust and the
gas from that star formation area and
then you're hearing the individual Stars
picked out as I don't know clickity
clacky it's not like a thing you have to
describe it I'm sure if there's a
musician you could find find something
better but you know having that
differentiation of understanding them is
really helpful now one distinction of
course is when you're cited you see the
whole picture at once but the audio
track gives you time is is a scan across
it either left to right in that case or
Center to Edge I found that actually to
be really important I'm so glad you
brought that that up because I look and
I'm used to looking the most right as
someone who's Visual and I have found
that I have learned things about data I
have been looking at for dozens of years
because I'm listening to it over time
and it's you know spoon feeding a piece
a slice of the image at a time it gives
me time to think about what else could
be happening and I've actually learn to
digest it and to process it in a
different way and I love that that's a
possibility is this something would
improve if we closed our eyes oh yeah I
think so as an activity like maybe the
next one have them listen to that one
okay let's okay what's the next one
maybe we should just listen to it first
and then I describe as something a
little different what we okay so the
next one is v404 Sig I think v44 signey
so V sounds like a variable star mhm
yeah and this is this is a what this is
actually a a black hole a stellar Mass
black hole so one of the smaller ones
and it's got a companion star and it's
kind of pulling off some material from
what that does is it causes these
outbursts that then the light kind of
like I don't know bounces off of the gas
and dust and the CH areas around it
causing light Echoes and you're seeing
the light Echoes as those rings in the
X-ray light but you're going to hear it
I think more distinctly should we close
our eyes for yeah let's close let's do
that they'll be fun
[Music]
feel like we're in like a meditation
class right now yeah yeah yeah yeah so
in that image you like just to emphasize
there are these places these sort of
concentric rings that are the emitted
gas from explosive episodes in the past
to slowly move out then you have another
exposive episode but there's a gap
between them and if you have another
sort of episode there'll be an energy
wave that'll overtake those yep and then
render them visible right and so it's
kind of like you know if you're driving
in fog your your lights kind of scatter
in that weird way that's that's kind of
what we're seeing and so you're able to
kind of trace the timing of this burping
of this black hole in this way which is
really cool but all that gas and dust
that it's ricocheting off that's kind of
what that sound we were trying to mimic
as you were hearing it almost sounds
like ocean waves which I feel like is
very appropriate to the Hampton yes and
and how do you determine what sound to
AIX I was going to ask that to the data
yeah so it's a few things so we have a
whole team I work with um Matt Russo and
Andrew Santo who are both musicians Matt
is an astrophysicist um and we also work
with Christine mik who is a consultant
who is blind as well and with a science
like story that we're putting together
we're trying to make sure it is as
authentic as possible to the data
because it is a mathematical mapping of
the data like using python uh into this
process and then you're essentially
selecting the programming language the
programming language um and then you're
selecting the sounds that will hopefully
differentiate the objects the best and
also describe the science the best and
in a pacing that lets you process the
data at the best pace so those are all
things that we test for wow so it's not
just you Rogue in the back room not a
conductor yeah yeah no no no no no no
and Dr Dre had I know be fun though that
would be yeah do you have any hip-hop no
I don't yet but maybe that'll change
yeah hip-hop and it I mean when you say
black hole there's got to be some hipop
somewhere it
this dark matter dark energy
it fits now Hubble had a deep field yes
so did anyone do the crazy thing with
Chandra they just look at in the middle
of nowhere we did the crazy thing with
Chandra 40 days and 40 nights we looked
at this one patch I know it
is we looked at this patch of the sky
and um what we found was just a
beautiful field of black hole so it
looks like you're looking at stars in
this image this is actually the deepest
x-ray image we've ever captured so this
is really special if you're trying to
describe it it's like someone just
flecked like paint onto a black
rectangle right it doesn't necessarily
communicate the excitement of the
science as like I think of it like this
is the awesomest image ever um and so
what we're going to do these dots on a
page these dots on a page cuz they're
black holes they are thousands of black
holes it was the highest concentration
of black holes that we had looked at
this cuz it can't see x-rays this would
just be filled with stars or galaxies or
galaxies yeah right but chander is
detecting that high energy anything else
there right it's Jordie focusing in on
X-rays and he sees this black holes
black holes everywhere it was a black
hole Bonanza as the scienti Is So
Exciting in the image to me never really
expressed it so this was an important
one to sonify um because I think it
actually tells the story better so we're
going to listen to a scan from the
bottom up to the top because it's
actually in Stereo and each of these
black holes is essentially colorcoded by
energy that's a Technique we often use
in image processing uh the lowest energy
material will be color CED to red and
the highest energy material will be
colorcoded to Blue with the medium in
green so kind of how are you going to do
it so it's the same thing it's sound so
we've taken the red encoded it um to the
lowest note and we've done the opposite
the blue is the highest and so you'll
hear that population of black holes I
think in a very unique way just right
here we don't otherwise know just
somewhere brighter than others right but
we don't know which has the highest
frequency okay let's check it out
[Music]
yo that is my
jail that's the one that's my favorite
that the one right there it's kind of
viby VI yeah oh that's number one with a
bullet baby yes but like you just listen
to a population of thousands of these
Superman of black holes like billions of
light years away for the most part right
and you've just heard that as you sweep
through that field which I think is
pretty fun that was beautiful that is oh
yeah it was very Pat methen yeah it has
this kind of like Indie thank P Indie
vibe to it there's only like four of you
here but I what I talking about that's
who I think of
yeah those are some of the highlights of
what you've been doing we talked about
the bullet cluster right on this one
we're going to scan from left to right
uh the X-rays I believe are like um whoy
sound I have to come up with better
descript I've just
realized you'll hear the Stars very
distinctly and then you'll hear um a
very strong kind of like note for the
Dark Matter map so yeah let's run that
one and see what you think mhm
[Music]
I mean that was a whoy sound I don't
know how else to describe it dark matter
didn't know what hit it that right right
that one that one was very sci-fi it is
a bit scii very sci-fi very sci-fi it's
no black hole Deep Field I'm sorry I
agree that one is my favorite yeah so
this is a tool to show us things we
already know are there right so uh Stars
galaxies especially your high energy
Universe which which enchants you so uh
but there's any thinking about how you
might detect dark energy this mysterious
pressure in the vacuum of space forcing
the universe to accelerate against the
wishes of gravity we know it's there but
we we don't know how to represent it
there's also neutrinos this there's
ghostlike particle that moves through
the universe unimpeded very difficult to
detect but it's out there this and
perhaps other Frontiers await your
efforts oh thank you um I think yeah
sonification is a very useful tool for
that type of thing I mean I remember
when the ligo neutron star merger story
had come out gra waves moving through
the universe and there's a very famous
sonification that took the data and
translate into sound because for that
reason that you know you're not looking
at an image of light in that case so
having to use some of these alternative
tools to represent it to analyze it to
me just makes sense but I think there's
a lot more we can do like we've started
working in hap ification which is using
for example on your phones if you've all
got them on mute like I'm sure you do
and you get a text you'll get a little
vibration right so that is the hap
ification um so that's a haptic that is
a haptic when it when there's a
vibrational affirmation of something
that just happened exactly and so we're
just learning how to essentially harness
that to be able to represent image data
and other of dat as well I don't know
that's weird I I kind of like him
because for example whether or not it's
your phone telling you you got a text
message silently but if you press a
button and then you feel a little
vibrational haptic it's like yeah I
gives you the response it's like I just
pressed that button right and that's the
idea right so like using these other
senses to be able to try to extrapolate
out more um from our data is is
something that I'm super excited about
yeah and how about other ways of
visualization which are familiar to us
all whether or not we're embedded with
them so virtual reality or augmented
reality is another variant here any kind
of mixed reality for me yes exciting
because there are issues of like scale
right and things like extended reality U
mixed reality augmented reality whatever
it might be that you're using remind us
what augmented reality is augmented
reality is when you've got like say oh a
Snapchat filter on yourself right you're
you're adding a layer of this reality to
your own reality uh virtual reality is
like a deeply immersive you're only in
that virtual reality um and there can be
combinations as well and so in astronomy
you know I can kind of picture in the
not so distant future uh one of my
colleagues in Cambridge is doing some
kind of data analysis on a black hole
and they're working with someone in
Japan and in real time they're able to
step through this object in virtual
reality or you know pick your reality of
choice right and they're able to use
sonification uh to check the variability
of that black hole perhaps whatever it
might be like there are all of these
combinations of being able to process
your data and to understand your data I
always wanted movie theaters to do that
yes it would be very cool where the
movies just happening around you yeah
and you just walk up closer to the bar
that is called life meal
it is I guess you're right okay I can't
argue that so and what about
3D thing well so you've been a big 3D
printer lately yeah I'm very big fan of
it yeah so we have all these 3D models
that we create for science for
scientific analysis right when you
understand the red shift the moving away
of something from you versus the blue
shift what's coming towards you you can
map that into a 3D representation of
this object so then you can take that
and you can move it to a 3D printer so
that you hold a version of it in your
hand so just to be clear until we
figured out how to get the distance to
anything the sky was imagined to just be
this sort of the inside surface of a
spherical Bowl right which would make
everything at the same distance so no
one is no one is thinking 3D about
anything in the universe and now that we
have 3D information you get to work on
your 3D printing and you can represent
it 3D print it hold a version in your
hand which is great again if you're
Blinder low vision and you want tactile
exploration of your data it just gives
you another Avenue and it's very
exciting and so you just have people uh
exploring this be they cited or not it
still has value right in a 3D space yeah
actually CPA was the first one that we'd
ever done using observational data into
a 3D model that was like super exciting
for us and we 3D printed it and the
response to it was so fantastic so
fantastic well excellent we want to see
where this continues to go uh is there a
future what is the future of X-ray
astronomy yes so chander is 25 but still
in amazing health because our Engineers
on the ground like it's too far to fix
it you can't like send up astronauts to
fix it so anything they have to do to
take chander to the doctor is just
through coding right astronomy runs on
coding and they do a brilliant job with
it and you just reprogram it you're just
reprogramming it you're doing little
tiny fixes here and there if uh for
example you need to look at a different
kind of object you just reprogram it a
bit whether through Fortran or whether
through C++ all of these additional
languages that we have we just fix it or
python exactly yeah and so that gives it
prolonged life that gives it beyond what
what ever is imagined for it it was only
supposed to be 5 Years and we're at 25
um and there's no Expendables for like
Fuel and stuff like that that we have to
be concern it's just floating in or what
about degradation you talked about these
photons bouncing down this Barrel I I
would assume that even a photon might
have a little bit of an effect like
dripping water on a rock honestly most
of concern is because uh it's so
sensitive and the Sun is close to it and
so like there is issues with like how
much it could warm up perhaps because it
has to be kept very cool in order to
observe these capture these x-ray
photons so the sun is always kind of
offering a bit of a danger but there's
lots of fixes for it uh you know how
it's pointing where it's tilting what
it's observing at any given times all
the engineers are so clever to figure
out the best way to keep it super
efficient all from the ground so what's
the is there future plans yeah soer
there are there are new telescopes that
are going to be coming on board um the
Athena one is a European mission that
will be coming in the 230s we hope
doesn't still quite have the resolution
of chander however so we are hoping
because it's
Europe oh no we're hoping to plan like a
a super chander right like a Next
Generation chander it's temporarily
called The Links Mission um and the idea
is to provide an even larger area to
collect the x-rays even more high def
and that would just dream come true
that's that's brilliant and we look
forward to just more reporting yeah from
because you're doing something that none
of us have ever met anyone doing what
you were doing so who knew this was a
job I it's like what do mommy do well I
have to explain that hey I'd like to
offer some Reflections on this evening
and this content if you look at the Arc
of
science progress in science over the
centuries
in almost every case advances in our
understanding of the universe have
arrived in the presence of some clever
device some clever new way to prove the
world around us and the people who do
this think about it they were not
content with all the previous ways that
we were decoding the world our eyes were
not enough our ears were not enough so
you find another way to do it and you
reveal that the universe is talking to
you in these places that were previously
ignored or had no clue they even existed
and so it leaves me humbled in the
presence of what could still be
discovered in the
universe are we like William hersel just
happy with the red orange yellow green
blue violet and that's the whole world
and then oh my gosh there's another
branch of the electromagnetic spectrum
little did he know that exercise would
continue 100 years from now will they be
saying little did Kim know that there's
a whole other way to look at the
universe and back in 2024 we were
practically blind is that what's missing
in our understanding of the universe
forcing us to be blind to the 95% of the
jelly beans in that canister
we know they're there we don't know what
they're made of so I take this not as an
occasion to celebrate how far we've come
but to reflect on how much farther we
still need to
go that is a cosmic
perspective so beautifully said Thank
You Gil
Hall Chuck
Nice Kimberly Aran
I'm Neil degrass Tyson your personal
astrophysicist as always keep looking up
[Music]